Hello and welcome.
And by the end of this section you're going to be able to use a colour palette as well as multiple layers
and make yourself a couple of flames.
Here's a couple of examples that I have made.
And of course I'm sure you guys will come up with something fabulous as well.
Okay welcome to this lecture on the paint brush and the air brush.
We are combining them because they are very very similar in fact they're quite similar to the pencil
although they're closer to one another.
But first of all before we get into those two brush tools themselves just want to highlight the fact
that there are in fact nine brush tools.
So by the end of this lecture itself we will know the pencil because we've done that already.
We will know the paint brush an air brush.
Now the eraser itself that is a type of brush.
We've got an ink tool.
We're not going to cover that this lecture.
We've got a clone tool.
We're also not going to have a look at that.
And then we've got a blur and sharpen a smudged tool and a Dodge and Burn again.
Those are all things we will take a look at later on.
But for this lecture Let's have a look at the paint brush and the airbrush.
So in order to demonstrate these brushes I'm going to have to have an image.
So let's go ahead and create a new image 32 by 32.
And I'm going to zoom in as normal.
Now we're going to start at it actually with the pencil tool just to remind us what that was all about.
And I'm going to set the size of this brush to probably two pixels wide.
Now sometimes I have this difficulty and you will too.
It can be a real pain to try and get the right number at this point.
I might as well have used down arrow would have been quicker.
But what I tend to do is leave the cursor flashing there and use control in a and that's command an
A on a Mac and then I just type in the number I want.
That's much easier than faffing around any other way.
So we have are two by two here.
Let's just draw a squiggly line with our pencil.
Now you can see it's absolute.
It snaps to each individual pixel.
It's called a hard edge.
And in a bit more detail.
Hard edge basically refers to the brush type itself.
We see it's got a hardness between 25 here and going up it treats it as absolutes it treats is black
and white and nothing in-between.
Now if we do the same curve at this time with the paint brush selected we could see the shortcut key
is P very useful if we do the same thing here we get a slightly difference.
If I go back up and down we get a slightly different out put.
Now this is an absolute it's able to colour in-between the pixels and it is fuzzy on the edge.
And of course this will be controlled as well by the brush type.
If I make it harder than it comes out darker first time I'm going to undo that.
So I've got space for my airbrush the air brush is really neat.
But it is somewhat different from the.
Paint brush itself.
Now you might just be looking at this going well.
Aren't they just faded versions of one another.
Kinda.
Now the pencil as I say that is absolute.
But the other two have this feathering of fuzziness to them.
And whilst we're talking about fuzziness and a hard edged tool you may remember back on the eraser that
there was an option in the tool options for hard edge but that option does not exist for these three
brush types.
And the reason for that is if you were to have an airbrush or a paint brush with a hard edge it would
behave exactly the same as a pencil and that would defeat the point of having the pencil tool.
Now in summary with these three tools you will find that the pencil is hard.
This fuzzy nurse is technically called anti-aliasing so it creates non anti-aliasing brush strokes the
paint brush is intermediate is probably it is likely to be the most commonly used of this group of three.
The airbrush however is the most flexible and controller Bowl.
However it does give it a bit more do a bit more of a learning curve to use.
Now let's just clear down our background in order to do that.
I'm going to just hit the delete key and that will clear the background ready for me to draw on it.
Now if I draw a n s again with the paintbrush tool we get a consistent output from our brush.
I'm simply using a mouse.
I'm not using any stylus.
If you do have something precious sensitivity in your using that you may get slightly different results
are just show that really quickly and I think it's still turned on yes it is.
If I go ahead I can change.
Actually that looks exactly the same so ignore me on that one.
That was not a great example but the pressure sensitivity of a stylus can make a big difference.
Now the airbrush itself is ever so slightly different.
If I go and make that shape again initially you could say oh yeah that's just the faded version you've
used a lighter colour grey or change one of the tool options so it's not laying down as much paint.
However if we have a look at the tool options and alternate between the paint brush and the airbrush
pee in a on our keyboard we see that the only thing that changes other than its name are the two entities
at the bottom rate and flow rate as it sounds is how frequently ink is deposited or paint is deposited
and the flow is how much is deposited.
So the best example I can give of this is to turn the flow all the way up and click in hold and we can
see it fills in that group of pixels and I click on hold again and it does the same thing.
Now I've experimented.
If I turn the rate all the way up to 150 It fills in very quickly and obviously there's a lot of flow
there's a lot of paint coming through.
If I tone that down from 150 to maybe 20 I think it was.
You can see it incrementing.
And again one two three four five.
So you can see that it's outputting much slower than it did before.
Now not to say that if you're moving the brush it doesn't deposit more ink it will do if we turn the
flow back down.
Then we have a much lighter line.
So once again let's clear down that I'm going to hit the delete key.
There we go not backspaced by the way but the least.
And let's try out some quick colour picker and straight lines a recap on straight lines so I'm going
to go to my foreground background colour so I can actually use some colours.
I'm going to use the paint brush to lay down my colours.
I'm going to set the size of the brush to eight.
And let's go back to the foreground background colour.
And I'm going to lay down some yellow some red some blue and some green.
Probably why not.
So there we go we've got a series of colours and obviously the white in the background and because we
use the paint brush you can see it's faded those edges.
So it looks.
So it's a more smooth transition between them and you would have had far more control over that and
the amount of fading with the air brush.
And that's where its flexibility can really pay dividends.
So as you're painting you're often already have the colour laid down that you want to use again.
And if you hit the control key the cursor itself will change to a colour picker and you can pick the
colours that are already laid down.
Now you will notice that they will also pick the intermediate colours up as well which is incredibly
useful when youre halfway between two particular colours and you want to reuse that colour.
So I've got this yellow here.
I wanted to fade it a bit more gradually between the red and the yellow.
I could pick an intermediate colour and go along with that.
And again I could do it here and I can find a purple so you can see very quickly how you can generate
more colours from what you already have and have a much smoother transition between those colours.
In fact from the four I laid down I now have one two three four five six seven different colours and
of course the green itself the original green is completely new at this point because I just overpainted
it with the New Green.
Never mind.
And then finally before we get on to the challenge I would like to go through with you a brief overview
of the tool options them selves.
So we have at the very top the tool name itself so we can see we've got the paint brush selected and
then we have further down mode.
Now you will see mode in several places throughout guimpe.
I'm not going to dive into the details of it in this particular section.
As you can see there's lots to go through and we'll get a mode more so when we start dealing with mode
when it comes to lasers.
The next one down is opacity and I like to think this as the strength of the brush enables you to lay
down a lesser amount of green So it's a way of controlling almost if you like the flow of paint coming
out now the brush type itself we can change that about.
And there are loads of different types of brushes.
At the moment we are just dealing with the circular ones.
However there are some other shapes swell feel free to play with that.
But we'll go into more customisable brushes later on in the course.
Next we have some further brush options its size its aspect ratio its angle so the best way of describing
sizes simply how many pixels wide something is.
And that is far too wide to demonstrate anything.
Some with the double click there and go back to eight.
So weve got a nice circle on our screen.
If I change the aspect ratio you will find that it flattens in one direction or if we go back the other
way it will flatten in another direction an angle is simply going to rotate that's between.
There we go.
Different angles so it could be quite useful if it was an angle.
Here we go 45 degrees.
We can now paint at a 45 degree angle that can be useful for some stylized text for example.
Further down we have dynamics.
We're not going to touch that at the moment.
We are using an on off switch at the moment.
In the form of a mouse or a trackpad.
Now that doesn't really have anything in the way of dynamics.
However if we do have a stylus you can change how.
Your stylus reacts by using the dynamics.
And there are some hidden dynamics options there as well.
Finally we've got jitter smooth stroke and incremental.
And again we're not going to have a look at them in this section but we will take a closer look at them
later on and armed with that knowledge.
It's time for a challenge.
Okay and your challenge for this lecture is to create your first game icon.
And we're going to focus on fire.
Use any of the tools we have learned so far and look at reference images of fire to help you out.
In fact there's a good one just in the background.
There's an explosion create four variations and you can either save them as separate files or indeed
just for variations in one file on multiple layers and then share your four designs at 64 by 64.
Of course we're going to be working in 30 to buy 32 for the main image itself.
Pause a video and give that a go.
Okay guys welcome back.
Let's go ahead and create some fire.
Now I'm just going to get rid of that mess.
It's not going to help me at all discard the changes I'm going to create a new file and whips in hyatt's
file I'm gonna open up the advanced options here and with the background colour I'm going to fill this
in the background colours currently white.
I want it to be black so let's hit the over these foreground and background colours.
Excellent.
Let's go to file new 32 by first to remember that and then foreground colour for the foreground is currently
black.
Chelsea of JS zoomed in.
Now I've rotate my brush ever so slightly so I'm going to go back in and put my aspect ratio back at
zero and my angle back says zero.
So those two are right and I can start using this right so I have a palette that I created earlier for
fire.
Or indeed there is one called Fire code as well.
Look at all of those.
I think I'm going to use.
I'm going to use my one I'm going to go for the challenge of using the one that I made earlier just
to see if that is really going to work.
Now let's go for foreground background colour and I've also got my black and white as well but I can
pick from.
So I'm going to start at the centre and I'm going to work.
Yeah.
That's fine.
Flip those around so I can use it.
So I'm going to work on the outline to begin with.
Eric go.
I'm using the paint brush to a wood here.
And I'm going to have to have it a bit smaller than eights.
Let's go for four.
And of course I'm likely to need it a bit smaller afterwards as well.
So there we go there's my initial flame.
And we need a bit more colour in it now says go ahead and let's create in fact I'm going to need an
even smaller brush size at this point.
So and again don't be afraid to adjust your brush size try things out go backwards and forwards I'm
going to try to airbrush at this point because I don't want to lay down so much in such quick succession.
I'm going to increase my rate and decrease my flow so I can whisk across the surface.
There we go.
That's looking good looking.
Kind of like a potion bottle at the moment.
What would be a yellow potion.
So amazing as your are made that far too far too dark in the middle.
Let's lighten it up.
That's starting to look better now.
Let's go back to my palate and select something darker and keep going round and round.
Now I'm going to just play with this now going to set a cap a limit of around probably five to 10 minutes
but no more.
And see what I'm going to be coming up with and I'll see you guys back in a few moments.
Okay guys.
Welcome back.
I am liking what I've got here.
I'm just going to go ahead and open the other ones that I've worked on.
Now I did not use lasers for this particular one but I did use layers for these others.
So just go ahead and make sure I save my work out Shall I call this I call it fire one.
And I'm going to have a look at the other ones that I've made here.
See Fire example one two and three.
So let's bring that one up.
This one bit more intense a bit more jagged a bit more exciting perhaps say a more fearsome flame.
Let's go and see what else we've got here.
Fire example.
That was three.
This one.
Well it looks exactly the same.
It's not these ones are on layers.
So you've got a a bolt or a meteorite or something along those lines.
But it's still flame like.
And finally I have this one it's a bit bigger similar to the first one.
It's very exciting.
And look we can bind them together to have an awesome flame on top.
So there we go.
Those are my four designs.
I'm going to go ahead now and upload those to the forum.
Hope you guys have come up with some amazing stuff.
Looking forward to seeing it.
Remember to share so I and the other students can see what you guys have been up to.
And I will see you guys in the next lecture.